Ultra-fast computers and advanced mathematical formulas ...
have far surpassed humans in stock trading.
Some algorithms seem to be alive.
Algorithms are quietly waiting for your actions at Apple ...
or your pension money is on the market.
The only ones who fully understand this system are its architects:
algorithm developers. Haim Bodek is one of them.
After discovering strange misdeeds, he embarked on a crusade ...
against this complex system.
This goes directly against Wall Street's tacit silence law ...
and its confidentiality. Here's what to expect.
It's like a rule: never accuse others, the market, traders ...
it's always your fault, your code is wrong.
On Wall Street, you are necessarily scammed unless you are the scammer.
On Wall Street, there is a culture of confidentiality.
It doesn't happen, going to the SEC.
Welcome to Backlight.
You will discover the smallest corners of our financial markets.
It is played to the nearest penny, for an action.
That's all.
When only one tick , the quotation scale, or a price changes ...
this is where the game starts.
When this tick varies, the world is divided between the winners ...
and the losers.
The machine behind the major financial markets ...
made of mathematical models ...
data centers and kilometers of fiber optic cables ...
is camouflaged by technological complexity and confidentiality.
The creators of this financial system are new employees of Wall Street:
quants ...
mathematicians and physicists ...
responsible for a technological revolution.
Haim Bodek is a quant.
Specialized in artificial intelligence, he worked for Hull Trading ...
and Goldman Sachs.
He knows the system from the inside, he participated in its creation.
One day, I was called and advised to contact Haim Bodek ...
because he had information on high frequency trading ...
a subject that we dealt with in the "Battle of the Quants". So I called him.
Listening to Haim Bodek speak was like opening Pandora's box.
He entered the system to gain access to a series of files ...
containing information that is incredible, according to the public.
No one was talking about types of orders before Haim landed.
I heard what Haim was talking about:
order types which, if used properly ...
can guarantee profit.
Several people in the audience knew that, they cowered ...
they wondered who he was, and why he was revealing it all ...
why he wasted our opportunity ...
to generate income on the financial market.
There were quite a few Russians.
One of them came to me and said to me:
"I know what you are doing. I am with you ...
"if you ever need help, someone ...
"I have contacts."
I said to him, "Am I at a conference as for?"
And these are just the reactions of others. I said to myself :
"Look, it's just geeks who did this ...
"I don't think I'm going against the crowd, or anything like that."
2011, Bodek's high frequency trading business, Trading Machines ...
went bankrupt.
According to Bodek, it's because of a wrong type of order ...
or the way he told the Stock Exchange to execute his order.
This is not the installation I had before.
But hey, it will be fine.
When we launched Trading Machines ...
we knew which machines were slower ...
we knew which companies were slower than us ...
and which were faster than us ...
because we have negotiated with these companies.
Were you as fast as the others?
No, we were faster than them.
Take a second ...
it looks like it's a lifetime of transactions ...
between these algorithms that we don't even see.
It was Bartt C. Kellerman who invited Haim Bodek to tell his story ...
at the "Battle of the Quants", a seminar during which analysts discuss ...
high frequency trading, among others.
When you buy a stock, you buy it at a price ...
and the next person who buys it has to pay more.
This margin is the advantage ...
which many of these THF organizations could benefit from.
These are minute quantities.
But if the action is repeated millions of times, it creates huge income.
10 years ago, these analysts created a model, used on the market ...
then they went to the beach to relax ...
and counted their money at the end of the day.
Bodek created an algorithm for Trading Machines ...
supposed to guarantee an income.
A slot machine that withstood the financial collapse of 2008.
But overnight, the algorithm stopped working.
I started to observe behaviors on certain exchanges ...
who were strange.
This algorithm did not allow transactions ...
even if it varied the price ...
no one was trading the stocks.
I go back and look for the code that has changed.
There are millions of codes.
The model I see has nothing to do with all the anomalies I have seen.
It's like a rule: never accuse others, the market, traders ...
it's always your fault, your code is wrong.
We had to wait 12 months, from that day ...
to explain it to me. And it was explained to me in person.
That's why I haven't discovered it before.
I was there, I was looking for what mistake we had made.
I went to a seminar, organized by this scholarship ...
and I said, "I'm sorry, I have a problem."
Who were you talking to? - A type of business development ...
whose job is to improve growth on the stock market.
He explained to me that my order was systematically disadvantaged ...
because I was using the wrong type of order.
I will not accuse the asymmetries of the financial market of what happened.
But I must say that I wasted a year of my life ...
to look for something that I could have learned by having a drink.
What was your first reaction?
I was humiliated.
I wondered how I could not have known.
Bodek thought he understood the cogs ...
of our automated financial markets.
But he did not follow social codes ...
from the world of high frequency trading.
Some traders had found a way to place their order first.
Bodek started out in a pioneering company in automatic trading ...
in Chicago, at Hull Trading.
The process we used to hire people was very strict.
It was quite difficult to get a job at Hull Trading.
Blair Hull is a trading legend, a math genius.
Hull made his first fortune at the blackjack tables in Las Vegas.
With this money, he created Hull Trading.
With his analysts, he was a forerunner of financial market automation.
In 1977, I went to the Pacific Exchange ...
and I realized that all the paper on the floor didn't need to exist ...
I thought that a good programmer could automate all of this in one or two years.
I understood well what turn things would take.
But it happened 30 years later.
Those entering Hull Trading did not want to work on Wall Street.
They entered to be surrounded by very intelligent people ...
to solve incredible problems.
It was not seen as a job on Wall Street.
I never would have thought of applying for an investment bank.
I'm more from the world of Google, not that of Goldman Sachs ...
even if it went well with them.
Our research on the origins of the technological revolution ...
that has affected the financial markets in recent decades ...
led us to an even more legendary trader: Thomas Peterffy.
We have everything here, the American flag, nature ...
We are 50 minutes from New York, the weather is good, it's good.
At 21, Petterfy fled Communist Hungary.
He is one of the first to see the enormous potential ...
automatic trading.
With his company Interactive Brokers ...
his net worth is estimated at $ 6 billion.
He receives us in his "office".
I have the first touch pad ...
that I created in 1983.
Those on the floor used it.
It was connected to a battery.
And here you could display options ...
with the strike price and the expiration date.
There were the offers.
Thus, the negotiators of the prosecution could know the state of the market.
And thanks to these tactile keys ...
Is it a touch screen? - Yes.
What year? - 1983.
How were the others doing?
The others, well, they used their brains.
Have you patented it?
No, I don't believe in patents, I think patents ...
prevent people from inventing new things.
So the other people copied you?
Of course, the others have always copied me.
But it's nothing, it moves the world.
If there was a computer on the floor in early 1980 ...
it was not directly connected to the price in real time.
My computer was in the office. I went up by the elevator ...
I launched my computer, went down again, executed the transactions ...
then I walked, went up, restarted the computer and went down again.
I couldn't get a price in real time.
The first time we had an option on the parquet ...
to enter an S&P 500 price, we had a "human counter".
It was a person looking at the screen ...
and raise or lower the price to make sure it was the same.
These were the rules that the stock market followed to ensure ...
that people weren't going to switch to automation.
We found a way to join the cable ...
to which the keyboard was connected ...
and we used the functions of the keys on a computer.
So it was much faster, we didn't need to use the keyboard.
A NASDAQ agent came and saw it and said, "You can't do this."
I asked him why, he replied, "Because ...
"According to the rules, all orders must be entered using the keyboard."
So we decided to create ...
keyboard cover with pistons, rubber fingers ...
going up and down and typing.
The only problem is that it made a lot of noise.
The next time, when the agent came back ...
he heard this crazy noise.
Orders were flowing. And he didn't know what to do.
He stayed watching for a while, then he left.
We never heard from him again.
In the 90s, the establishment of Wall Street realizes ...
that it is lagging behind the technological revolution.
Just before turning century, Blair Hull sells his business ...
as well as its employees ...
to investment bank Goldman Sachs for half a billion dollars.
As Hull was bought out, I was able to get involved with Goldman.
We often joked about it in Hull.
We were all given personality tests.
And the type of personality I was given ...
was, roughly, that of a mad scientist.
For about 9 months, people were worried ...
because I work in a bank.
I spent a good part of my life, my childhood ...
surrounded by physicists in physics laboratories.
What did your father say when you started working at the bank?
I think he was not very happy about Goldman.
In this universe, people were exceptional.
I remember that I met, during small parties, at the age of 8 years old ...
so and so who won the Nobel Prize.
My father said to me, "Come and shake their hands."
You should know that some had created nuclear bombs.
These people believed that science would make the world a better place.
And that the way to make the world a better place ...
was to understand, create and discover.
Around the world, people watch high finance and have to think:
"Why use your intelligence like this?"
"Always make more money than others, is that genius?"
The team of geniuses in mathematics and physics ...
who chose to work in finance has automated 70% of transactions ...
and allowed 50% of them to happen in a few milliseconds.
We call this high frequency trading, or THF.
THF has nothing to do with the economy.
It's about understanding how networks work ...
how they plant, how to make them plant ...
and how to plant them to your advantage without being discovered.
Eric Hunsader's business, Nanex, sells financial data.
Out of curiosity, he searches for abnormal patterns in data flows.
He knows what is going on in the financial markets, down to the millisecond.
Eric, where are you taking us?
I'm taking you to the CME office in Aurora, Illinois.
The CME is in the center of Chicago.
Yes, as long as the New York Stock Exchange is in the center of New York.
That's where the machines, the data centers are.
The building on the left houses the CME data center.
It looks huge! - It is.
Billions of dollars are traded in the futures markets.
When you send orders to sell and buy, this is where it happens.
What are these poles, these antennas for?
It's to make it happen faster in New York.
I do not recommend it, but if you climbed this tower ...
if you look in the direction that this parable indicates ...
and if you had a telescope, you might see the next one.
I thought they were using fiberglass, fiberglass cables.
It's more direct. For the speed of light, we speak of distance.
And in fact, light travels faster in the air than in the fiber.
Everything is played to the nearest nanosecond.
You just have to be faster than the others.
It's really not that great. There, there is a relay.
Several things can cause signal loss:
the fresnel effect, the atmospheric conditions ...
or the balloon of a child who takes off at the wrong time.
Bodek's Trading Machines also made a profit from THF.
If it had been a fair match ...
if I had really lost, I would have wanted a lot.
I would have looked after my ego, I would have shown humility.
I knew from my own judgment where I screwed up or not.
Trading Machines, the THF company of Haim Bodek ...
closed for good in January 2011.
I had heard of Trading Machines, but I did not know Haim.
I figured I could meet him.
We met soon after.
It was a few months after the closing of Trading Machines.
It's no coincidence that Bodek started talking to Scott Patterson ...
a Wall Street Journal reporter.
Patterson has been following high frequency trading closely for years.
Without knowing each other, Bodek and Patterson both ...
analyzed conflicts of interest between the THF industry ...
and the stock exchanges for a certain period.
We ended up in a Starbucks in Manhattan.
And I remember precisely, towards the end of our conversation ...
Haim said something about ...
illegal action in the market.
He thought that was partly why Trading Machines had closed.
I had an organization chart with all the people ...
the highest placed in THF, in my bag ...
and other data that was part of my business information.
He had worked on it a lot, but it was very vague.
Did you give him these documents?
I let him take a look at it.
I said, "You have to tell me what it is."
I have spoken so many times in my career to people who say they know something ...
which may be illegal, something rigged at some point.
But they don't say more, it's still very vague.
I remember the first interview I had with him ...
we sat down, it must have been 10:30 am.
And we started talking for 7 hours straight.
I didn't eat anything, I had to drink a glass of water.
I sat there, listened to Haim, and took notes.
My computer's battery has run down, I took notes by hand.
Because he really said it all.
I'll try to explain this to you with a metaphor.
It's a circus. I will tell you the facts through comedy.
But unfortunately, it looks like that.
Here's a concert hall, let's say it's Metallica playing.
I like metal, so it's Metallica who plays in this concert hall.
The ticket office opens at 6 p.m.
So I'm going to stand in line.
After a while, people arrive, I am no longer the last in line.
There are resellers.
They are also in the queue, with me.
I recognize them by their t-shirt, they all wear the same.
They are also in close collaboration with the Bourse, the concert hall.
What kind of collaboration?
Perhaps one of them brings a significant volume.
That is to say, he buys a lot of tickets.
Obviously, he sells them to the spectators. One has a lot ...
another reseller owns 10% of the room.
A third dealer does not have much ...
but it largely has another room ...
and he has a seat on the board of directors of this room.
So there is a very close collaboration ...
between these dealers and the concert hall.
Metallica tickets sold on the black.
I will draw a parallel between the opening of the counter ...
and when a price may change, on the financial market.
At 6 p.m. that's what I'm going to attend.
Absolutely all these resellers ...
will literally teleport, in a picosecond.
They are all there in front of me.
How come ? I ask someone who answers me:
"They are very fast."
I said, "No, they teleported. They were behind me."
There is no difference between an order type and the one wearing the t-shirt.
You add a code to your order saying, "Respect me, please."
How did you hear about Haim Bodek?
I met him at Blair Hull's, he invited me to dinner.
What did you think of him?
He's great, he knows everything, we started talking about work in 5 minutes.
Have you noticed the same thing as him in your data?
No, we don't know who executed an order unless ...
We do not know who is carrying out the orders.
But he knows who executed his.
And he knows what market.
He thought his order should be the next to be executed ...
but it was not. It is impossible to know.
When someone started to explain to me, it was easy to understand the rest.
But if you don't know there are resellers ...
who will use certain types of orders to double you, buy tickets ...
and resell them to those who queue ...
If you don't know that a considerable number of transactions are taking place ...
if you don't know how it works ...
you believe what you see on the price stream.
Who is organizing this? - He's not a businessman ...
who created these characteristics.
Very few people have the technical skills ...
to create these characteristics.
Less than 10 people.
10? - Less than 10 people.
Do you know them all?
I know several of them personally, but not all.
I know their work well.
What was the function of the algorithms that you designed at Citadel?
I can't tell you that.
I'm really scared of Citadel lawyers.
Dave Lauer was a trader and analyst at Allston and Citadel, THF companies.
He testified as an expert at the Senate committee hearing ...
on high frequency trading.
Like Bodek, he is one of the few initiates ...
who talked about their experiences.
At the top, there is THF ...
and trading for own account in major banks.
These are the main ...
This is the part that everyone is trying to observe or integrate.
Below, there is the Stock Exchange.
And the stock market economic model concerns volume.
The stock exchanges are doing everything to attract THF ...
in their premises, and therefore, to attract volume.
Couriers are those who transmit orders to stock exchanges ...
and they earn money from the commissions of their "buy-siders".
At the bottom of the pyramid, there is the "buy side" ...
which brings together pension funds and investment funds.
These are the investors, those who are there ...
because they think a business has a solid foundation or a future.
The amount of money generated by all of these parties ...
represents the cost ... - Yes, it is the cost of transactions.
When an investment or pension fund executes a large order ...
what is this order in traders' jargon called?
It's donated money ...
it's easy money, it's cake ...
this is what is expected.
These algorithms are used to detect what is happening.
It's about understanding when institutions buy and sell.
They are waiting for my pension money to reach ...
Yes, they will bite you a little.
It is a slow death. We put you aside ...
at the time this order goes through the system.
You have to be on the other side of the transaction to make money.
It's been like this for a long time, people are used to it, they accept it.
They know they are being scammed.
On Wall Street, you are necessarily scammed unless you are the scammer.
Those who put their money in pension and investment funds ...
they don't understand what's going on.
If they understood that the banks ...
take their money and declare it as profit ...
they would do something.
But the problem is, it's too complicated for people to understand.
I thought it was funny when the problem of order types broke out.
It is obvious that many people did not know ...
that these markets offered special order types.
90% of financiers do not know how the American stock market works.
Before, it was the brokers who owned the stock exchanges.
They were integrating new businesses into the financial market ...
hoping to sell the stocks of these companies to their clients ...
and obtain fees for this sale.
These businesses would grow, be successful, and everything would be fine.
On the other hand, what is different in all of this ...
is that these scholarships were acquired in majority ...
by companies with private capital.
They are not necessarily intended ...
develop small businesses and get them listed on the stock market ...
but rather to generate monthly income.
High frequency trading ensures a gain for each transaction.
So if we manage to make transactions frequently ...
the profits generated make it possible to create a profit.
These THF companies benefit from the complexity ...
as they understand it, their function is to study the market structure.
They understand and exploit market inefficiencies.
The scholarships are over ...
places where companies attracted investors ...
to data centers where wars are waged by algorithms ...
who transact at the speed of light.
An invisible world which, during a sudden collapse ...
the infamous 2010 lightning crash ...
saw $ 862 billion evaporate ...
in a few minutes on the American financial market.
Wow! Almost 1000 points!
We call it a capitulation.
They will suspend the transactions, we cannot stop the sale.
For me, the lightning crash was a defining moment.
I couldn't ignore it.
I was on the THF floor.
Everything was fine, finally, the markets were down 2.5%.
We saw the riots in Greece on television.
Each time they rioted, the markets went down.
I remember watching, each floor broadcast CNBC.
I saw that the Dow Jones index lost 100 points ...
I said to myself: "Too bad", and I continued to work.
A minute later, I see that he lost another 100 points.
I get up and go to the futures traders office.
They are very restless, they don't know what's going on.
They had a lot of orders on the market, it's chaos.
100 more points are lost.
The CEO of the company comes running and shouts:
"Stop it all!"
They press the buttons, they turn everything off.
We are all grouped around these two screens.
On a screen, we look at the accounts ...
this is the futures market, people are ready to buy ...
and others for sale is the market.
As we look at the screen, the orders begin to decrease ...
orders are canceled, they decrease further, they disappear from the screen ...
and then there is nothing left. There was no more market.
For a few seconds, there was no more market.
We are all seated, we observe the emptiness.
We have no idea what's going to happen.
I thought something horrible had just happened ...
something indescribable, the market was gone.
I called my bargaining office and said:
"What is happening ?" They replied, "We don't know."
I said, "What are you doing? Are you expanding your markets?"
They said that is what they were doing. I thought there was only that to do.
Let's wait until it stops.
We were almost nauseated, we were worried ...
we didn't know if the world was going to stop.
Even the September 11 attacks did not have this impact.
Things returned to normal, the market started again ...
it went up suddenly, activities resumed.
Personally, I changed after that.
That day, I stopped believing in capitalism ...
finally, to the capitalism that we had built.
I had lost confidence in this system.
My friend has a doctorate in climate science, he worked at Harvard.
Next to me, there was a doctoral student in bioinformatics ...
on the other side, a semiconductor designer ...
behind me, someone who had a master's degree in math from MIT.
These people mobilize their impressive gray matter ...
and use it to make money in a THF system.
I couldn't justify it anymore.
They should have worked in research ...
against cancer or climate change.
And there they were, earning a fortune.
Were the markets, their efficiency, their stability improved?
That day, we knew we weren't.
It's bad.
There you know you have to stop.
We spent the whole day doing this. This algorithm brought in 200 dollars.
It has gone back to 471 now.
It balances.
It’s going down. Are you busy with options?
Yes, but that option ... - You take care of it.
The market is closed.
I just bought this share from Facebook and the rate has changed, what an idiot!
What a moron !
Now, I have 500 Facebook contracts in the day-to-day market.
I thought it was 3 a.m.
We manage hedge funds here.
We lead a community of traders.
We started from nothing.
I'm from Los Angeles, our main trader is from Boston.
We decided to come here and try to make a fortune.
This is Bryan Wiener.
He was head of traders at Trading Machines ...
which was led by this man, Haim Bodek ...
the "killer drug trafficker" is what it's called here.
He teaches us about microstructure ...
and we use it to try to become better traders.
I have fun watching these guys challenge the machines.
And they get there, it's fascinating, considering what's going on in this sector.
Peter Zhang and his friends rented an apartment in Manhattan ...
to launch hedge funds.
They just started working with Haim Bodek ...
to develop an algorithm that simulates the bold behavior of a trader.
Charlie lives here. It was supposed to be an office ...
it has become a tropical jungle.
He lives there pretty well, he has his own fan, his own bathroom.
Anand is our main trader, he has the largest room in the world.
This is the master bedroom.
Obviously, there is everything you need, it is a very large room ...
he pays a large part of the rent.
Most of the time, after working, when you're exhausted ...
we land on the sofas.
We're always together, that's where we hang out ...
this is also where I sleep. Here is my comforter.
I should tidy up a bit. - Where does Haim sleep when he stays?
When Haim stays, he sleeps there.
We contacted him via Twitter, we called him ...
he looked like a genius on the phone.
We told him he should come here ...
to see our work, which he would love, that we could associate.
He disembarks, he walks at full speed.
He's wearing a suit that is too big for him, and he says, "Hi, is this rolling?"
Anand has prepared a list of questions to ask Haim Bodek.
I said, "Okay, we'll do that."
And we see that Haim does something special, we call it "doing Haim".
He never stops, the genius is released.
He is highly respected, he has a lot of experience.
He has an impressive curriculum.
But no one forgets that he was a high frequency trader ...
and that his system failed.
This is why the industry has a certain image of him.
Some say it is not credible ...
let this or that no longer happen today.
But no fact proves it.
After talking to Scott Patterson, who published Bodek's revelations ...
in his book "Dark Pools" ...
Bodek decided to go to the American financial market authorities, the SEC.
On Wall Street, there is a culture of confidentiality.
It doesn't happen, going to the SEC ...
and tell them what's going on internally on Wall Street ...
how things work. You are an outcast if you do that.
And I say to myself:
Everything will disappear. Someone will speak, it will disappear overnight.
These are just a few lines of code, the basics.
Everything is artificial.
Bodek's complaint is registered with the SEC market authorities.
The investigation has been going on for 2 years now.
The SEC does not provide details on its progress.
The SEC has taken no action, and it's been two years already.
And we know that they tend to fine the stock markets ...
and to make sure that things work properly.
So either nothing happens, or it's so complicated that it takes years.
It is obvious that trading companies are much more sophisticated ...
than the SEC.
I think they are very intelligent.
They can go to the SEC and explain why they want a type of order ...
why it's useful for the rest of the market, and appear very credible ...
without saying that it will allow them to earn millions every day ...
and that it will save them money.
I think that proprietary trading companies benefit from the rules.
We have created rules that should not have been created.
And we have created order types that are closely monitored by the SEC.
I don't think we can criticize THF companies ...
who followed the rules.
Can we really expect the financial authorities to adapt ...
state-of-the-art technology?
The lightning crash was followed ...
many computer problems.
Like those that took place during the Facebook public offering ...
the Twitter crash when the White House explosions were announced ...
or the time Goldman Sachs lost $ 100 million ...
in 17 minutes due to an incorrect algorithm.
In a universe surrounded by silence and confidentiality ...
no one seems to understand what's going on or to control the situation.
The market, the interactions in the industry between these companies ...
to extremely complex technological systems ...
their operation ...
make the whole stock market system, high frequency trading ...
and technologies, very complex.
The lightning crash is a perfect example.
There is no cause and effect to be determined.
There is no need to wonder what is the cause of the lightning crash.
It doesn't make sense in the context of a complex system.
If the same events happened again, in the same way ...
there is no guarantee that it would cause a lightning crash.
It is the nature of a complex system.
Is it true that many traders don't understand the market?
I don't think anyone understands.
This is another characteristic of complex systems:
they really go beyond human understanding.
Because we don't know ...
We understand very well what our algorithms, our technology do ...
but once there is interaction with all the other systems ...
it's very difficult to know what's going to happen.
What did your father say when he knew you were an informer?
What I have done is consistent with the values ​​that have been instilled in me.
Didn't he tell you, "I warned you"?
I really think it's consistent with his vision of finance.
When you make the front page of a newspaper, you are supposed to keep a copy.
The title :
"A way to outperform others for high frequency traders."
About Wall Street culture ...
I think people don't realize how much fear reigns.
There are a lot of people on Wall Street who think ...
that they are very determined and deserving.
But at the level of daily life ...
fear is constant.
If we don't listen to good music ...
when parking in the parking lot ...
Literally? - Yes, there is so much fear.
The hierarchy is very marked, especially in investment banks.
For them, I did the most frightening, unimaginable thing.
The idea of ​​being in financial distress ...
to have his reputation tainted, to be rejected ...
it's their worst nightmare.
It was on the rise yesterday, tomorrow, it will do.
There is not a rule saying: Do not sell short the first day?
The only rule is: Do not short sell on Tuesday.
It was a courier who was walking his dog who told me that.
What is difficult is not really to be exonerated ...
it's already done.
The problem is what happens next. Where am I going now?